>> [BACKGROUND MUSIC] And
I think many people today
don't know what to
believe anymore.
>>People are basically
going to keep on
to help uncover what
really happened.
>>It felt like something
was watching me.
>>We weren't given
all the information.
We weren't told
the entire story.
>>GEORGE NOORY: And
welcome to Beyond Belief.
I'm George Noory.
Jeff Belanger our special guest.
You know, he's the
paranormal researcher goes
are all over this planet
looking for different things,
unusual things, scary things.
And sometimes things that are
right in our own backyard,
aren't they?
>>JEFFREY BELANGER: They are.
I've found there's some
legend in every town.
These are the things that
make our places special,
where we live.
Stories that the locals talk
about that you may not ever
hear about unless someone
chooses to share it with you.
And that's what makes
these things so special.
They define us, they
define a region.
A legend belongs to a
person that experienced it,
belongs to the location
where it happened,
and it belongs to the
greater community.
And the more we hear about,
the more famous it gets,
people want to come there
to see it and become
part of that story, which
is what I made a career on.
>>NOORY: One of
the greatest spots
for hauntings or visitations
of ghostly apparitions
happens to be in Washington DC.
The White House, right?
Who would think that?
>>BELANGER: You know, I would.
I would think that.
Not only is it probably the
most famous house-- famous house
in the United States, it's
the most famous haunted house.
And the reason is, so
much history left a mark.
Where history leaves a
mark, ghosts often follow.
And this building
has seen it all.
Every US president
has been there.
Washington died before
it was complete,
but he was still there for
the laying of the cornerstone.
When you walk into
the north portico,
when you walk into the
hall in the East Room,
and you stand there and
you say, oh, my goodness,
all the presidents stood
where I'm standing right now.
It's amazing.
You connect with them--
>>NOORY: Yes, it is
an incredible feeling.
>>BELANGER: Incredible.
And the people that
work there-- and there's
about 100 employees
of the White House
that are the cleaning crew, the
butlers, the grounds keepers.
These folks are apolitical.
It doesn't matter which
political party's in power--
>>NOORY: Yep.
>>BELANGER: --they work there.
I met a third generation
White House butler.
His dad was a butler
at the White House,
his dad's dad was a
butler at the White House.
>>NOORY: Probably did the
movie on him. "The Butler."
>>BELANGER: "The Butler."
And so these guys have stories.
They're very credible witnesses.
I'm always looking
for credibility
when I'm talking
to someone who--
>>NOORY: Sure.
>>BELANGER:
--witnessed something.
So they've been
drug tested, they've
been psychologically screened
every which way because they're
around the president, the first
family and other foreign heads
of state.
These people are
very, very credible.
And they're
passionate historians.
And they're walking down
the hall doing their job.
I interviewed a
foreman who turned
on the lights on the second
floor, part of his duties
in the morning, and there's
Lincoln sitting right
outside the Lincoln
bedroom, crossing his legs,
looked up at him,
and then disappeared.
>>NOORY: And clearly he
said, I could see him.
>>BELANGER: He saw him.
And here's the
thing about Lincoln.
It's not some faint apparition.
He's on our money, we
know what he looks like.
And he went downstairs
and he told the usher,
I just saw Lincoln.
And he was told,
you're one of many
that has seen
Lincoln in this way.
>>NOORY: So this is well
known within the White House?
>>BELANGER: Well known
and well documented.
To quote Harry S Truman in a
letter to his wife-- President
Truman-- "Sure as shootin'
the place is haunted."
He wrote about that
ghosts six different times
in letters to his wife.
He talked about hearing
someone walk around
when he knew he was the only
person on the second floor,
went downstairs to find the
Secret Service representatives
and say, what are
you doing upstairs?
>>NOORY: Right.
>>BELANGER: I'm
not upstairs, sir.
>>NOORY: I'm-- the president.
>>BELANGER: I'm down here
where I'm supposed to be.
Whoever you heard
walking wasn't me.
And here's the thing,
the White House,
nothing is supposed
to happen in there
that isn't checked
and double checked--
>>NOORY: Right.
>>BELANGER: --by--
>>NOORY: No mistakes.
>>BELANGER: That's right.
Doors aren't supposed to open
or close by themselves, nothing.
And so, when something
happens, everyone
takes immediate notice.
And it's curious.
I was talking to
a Secret Service
agent who was giving a
tour of the White House.
And I said, what do you
know about that ghosts here?
And he said, well,
people have seen
a British redcoat near
the north portico.
And, of course, he
mentioned Lincoln.
And I said, wow, you said
that so matter of fact.
Is this federal recognition
of the existence of ghosts.
And he said, I wouldn't know
anything about that, sir.
>>NOORY: That was your headline.
>>BELANGER: Yeah.
>>NOORY: He knew it.
>>BELANGER: He knew it.
>>BELANGER: But the
British Redcoat's
curious because we
find out the White
House was burned to
the ground in 1814.
>>NOORY: Yeah, it was.
>>BELANGER: The British
sacked Washington
and it was just an empty shell.
The stone walls survived but
everything else burned up.
>>NOORY: Yep.
>>BELANGER: And there's
two parts of the building--
>>NOORY: Olympus falling.
>>BELANGER: --never
been painted.
You can still see the burn
marks on two different windows
because what happens when
you let your guard down?
This ghost serves as a reminder.
And so imagine seeing someone
on the lawn of the White House
who doesn't belong there.
That's a security alert.
So these stories
come again and again.
Even in modern presidencies
they talk about it.
The Obamas have had experiences.
Michelle Obama talked
about a strange experience
one of their guests had
>>NOORY: The Reagans had a lot.
>>BELANGER: The Reagans
talked-- Ronald Reagan said in
an off the cuff remark,
he said, you know,
my dog would just
bark wildly right
in front of the Lincoln bedroom
and then never go in there.
>>NOORY: Well, and you
mentioned Truman so--
>>BELANGER: Truman, yeah.
>>NOORY: --let's
take a little look
at a video with Truman
and the Abe Lincoln story.
Here we go.
>>According to History.com,
Harry Truman, the 33rd US
President, once shared his
experience about its spookiness
with his wife in
a letter noting,
"I sit here in this old house
and work on foreign affairs,
read reports and
work on speeches,
all the while listening
to the ghosts walk
up and down the hallway and even
right in here in the study."
President Abraham
Lincoln's ghost
has been known to be seen in the
hallways or his former bedroom.
During World War II, the
British Prime Minister Winston
Churchill allegedly
saw Lincoln's ghost
by the fireplace while staying
in the former president's
bedroom.
>>NOORY: That's something.
I mean, that is just
absolutely riveting.
>>BELANGER: Yeah.
It is.
It's great.
The witnesses are great.
Just to clarify briefly.
The Lincoln bedroom was
originally the executive office
before they added the
east and west wings.
So now it's called
the Lincoln bedroom.
But that's where he
served as president.
So not only that, there's
also some curiosities
that come forward.
There's a famous photograph by
White House photographer Abbie
Rowe.
>>NOORY: He was
back in the '50s.
>>BELANGER: Back in the
'50s the White House
was gutted because they
were rebuilding everything.
They were going
down a few levels
and upgrading everything.
And this photograph
turns up, and if you
look in the corner of
the photograph- we have
a copy of it here--
you look in the corner
of the photograph you see
this semi transparent figure.
And what's interesting to
me is, the guys to the left
are just as far away from the
camera, but they're solid.
And you've got this
figure on the right that's
semi-translucent like that.
You can see right through it.
Curious, right?
>>NOORY: And they can't see it?
It looks like they're
not even noticing it.
>>BELANGER: All we know
is this is a White House
photo from White House
photographer Abbie Rowe who
took the photo of the
renovations going on.
So it's really interesting
when things like this turn up
and paranormal enthusiasts
say, aha, evidence.
Evidence to all these stories.
>>NOORY: Well, somebody
like Abe Lincoln,
Jeff, why does he hang around?
Because of the tragedy
of how he died?
Does he have
unfinished business?
>>BELANGER: I think he hangs
around because we need him.
We still need him.
Our nation needs him
and, more than anything,
the presidents need him,
all the modern US presidents
need him because his was the
most difficult presidency.
Hands down.
And so whatever you're
going through as president,
whether it's a war, terrorism,
whatever, you can always say,
Lincoln had it worse.
>>NOORY: Right.
>>BELANGER: Give me strength.
>>NOORY: Give me some--
>>BELANGER: Give me
strength, Lincoln.
>>NOORY: --some advice.
>>BELANGER: Yeah.
Be with me on this and
help me through this.
>>NOORY: Does anybody
see Kennedy there?
>>BELANGER: I haven't heard
about Kennedy sightings.
Not there.
But there have been--
people have reported
seeing a ghostly
cat which they view
as a harbinger of
something bad that's
about to happen to the nation.
Not just at the
White House, also
seen at the Capitol building
when they see the ghost cat.
People have seen Abigail Adams,
her spirit hanging laundry
in the East Room,
which is interesting.
When they first moved in, there
was no money for furniture.
So instead of going outside
to brave the elements,
she'd just hang her laundry
in the empty East Room
and let it dry in there.
And so people will report
smelling soap and seeing
a woman hanging laundry.
So many, so many stories just
pour out of that building
all the time.
I remember seeing Hillary
Clinton in an interview saying,
oh, it could be pretty
creepy at night.
George W Bush said how he
felt the place was haunted.
>>NOORY: They felt a presence.
>>BELANGER: Yeah.
I mean, just president
after president
has some remark
about this building.
The impact of the building
itself is awesome.
Have you been there?
>>NOORY: Oh, yeah Yeah.
>>BELANGER: I mean--
>>NOORY: I was there.
>>BELANGER: You can't
help but be moved.
I mean, forget the
paranormal, you just
walk through those
doors and you say, whoa.
This is big.
>>NOORY: I was invited there
for lunch with President Reagan.
>>BELANGER: Oh, nice.
>>NOORY: And I get there
and I figure, boy, this
is really cool.
I'm going to have lunch
with the president.
I was so far away
from him, Jeff,
I could barely even see him.
>>BELANGER: Right.
>>NOORY: I mean it was just
this little tiny Ronald Reagan.
I was way in the back somewhere.
But it's a fascinating place.
>>BELANGER: It is.
It's amazing.
And you breathe in history.
It's part of America.
We are-- we're part owners
of that house, you and I.
We pay our taxes and it's
such a special place.
And I think it's haunted
because it should be haunted.
Because we should remember
everything that took place
there, some of the decisions
that were made that
altered the course of humankind.
From dropping
nuclear weapons to--
>>NOORY: Oh, yeah.
>>BELANGER: Everything.
You name it.
All the decisions that
came out of that building.
It's incredible.
>>NOORY: We talked
earlier that Abe Lincoln
was the one who
showed up the most.
Is that still the case?
>>BELANGER: Yeah.
I think at some point
we become fixated.
When a first family
moves in, they
got to know about the
ghost of Abe Lincoln.
He's the most prominent figure.
There are others but--
>>NOORY: I wonder if they
warn them or tell them.
>>BELANGER: Well, especially--
>>NOORY: And how do you do that?
How do you talk to the
newly elected president--
>>BELANGER: Right.
>>NOORY: --the
first lady and say,
now, there's something we got to
tell you about the White House.
And, you know, they'll go, what?
Its kind of haunted.
>>BELANGER: I wrote a
children's book called
"Who's Haunting
the White House?"
And the whole idea was--
>>NOORY: Great book, by the way.
>>BELANGER: Thank you.
Thank you.
The whole idea was to use
ghosts as an innovative way
to teach history.
But it's, in many accounts,
just like the Truman clip,
we're talking about people who
believe it's truly haunted.
I sent a copy when it was
done to President Bush--
because that's when
I first went in there
was under his
administration-- and he wrote
me back a nice letter
saying, congratulations.
And then I sent
a copy because it
was right near the
transition time-- I
knew Obama had
children that were--
they were much younger
then moving in.
And how do you tell
your kids, you're
moving into a haunted house?
I mean, they're
going to find out.
If you don't tell them, they're
going to find out from someone.
And so--
>>NOORY: Or they'll
see something.
>>BELANGER: They'll
So I sent a copy of the book.
I don't think it's
something to be feared.
We don't hear about
dangerous encounters.
>>NOORY: Not there.
>>BELANGER: No, not there.
For some reason.
>>BELANGER: Well, I mean, it's
a supposed to be a safe place.
That's-- the White
House is built for that.
And what's so
important, too, about
living in a haunted
house-- whether it's
the White House
or your own home--
we need to feel safe at home.
And one of things that's so
unnerving about a haunted house
is, imagine having an
intruder that you can't see,
that you can't call the police
to have them ushered out--
>>NOORY: Who won't believe you.
>>BELANGER: Right.
And and so that is unnerving.
And you don't feel safe.
And when you don't
feel safe-- you're
talking about Maslow's
hierarchy of needs, right?
Personal safety is
pretty near the bottom,
right above food and shelter.
If you don't feel safe,
your life falls apart.
And that's what I think is so
disturbing about people that
go through haunting experience.
You've got all of life's
regular challenges and now this.
And I think that's why when
we hear about haunted home
stories-- whether the White
House or someone else's-- we
connect with those people
because we say, oh, my gosh,
what if that were me?
What if that were my house?
>>NOORY: I have a house back
in St. Louis built in 1929.
I'm convinced somebody
had died there
because everybody who
stays at that house,
whether it's my
granddaughter, or my daughter,
or people who are there
when I'm not there,
everybody talks about this
old man who's in this house.
I have never seen him at all.
And I've owned this
place for nine years now.
But everybody there
has said that they've
seen this friendly old man just
kind of like hanging around.
They hear doors and steps
and all these other things.
Initially, I said,
folks, it's an old house.
It was made in 1929.
You're going to have
creaky steps and stuff.
But when everybody tells
you this, you got to think,
you know what, there's
something going on.
But the question, Jeffrey,
is, why don't I hear it?
Why don't I see it?
Why do they do it?
>>BELANGER: I think the
experience, sometimes,
it's not for you.
I've been in situations where
there were four people, four
of us standing there, and two
people are seeing something
and I'm right next to
them and I don't see it.
And I think you're getting into
the realm now of belief, right?
You're getting into the
realm of not hard science
but experiential phenomena.
And so you might be tuned
to a different frequency.
We're all listening to the
noise around us all the time,
and your frequency might be
just off of whatever is there.
But who knows?
Once you start tuning into it,
once you start looking for it,
then it seems to happen
more frequently for people.
Once they know what to look for.
So you still may
have your encounter.
But how do you feel
owning a haunted home.
>>NOORY: It's kind of weird.
>>BELANGER: Is it?
>>NOORY: Yeah.
>>BELANGER: You ever
get out of the shower
and go, hey, wait a minute.
>>NOORY: It's weird
because I'll have
to disclose it if I
ever sell the place.
>>BELANGER: Yeah.
>>NOORY: Won't I?
>>BELANGER: Well, you
know, stigmatized property
is becoming a discussion
point in the law.
A stigma could be there
was a murder here.
Forget ghosts.
But--
>>NOORY: That you
might have to disclose.
>>BELANGER: If they ask,
you have to disclose it.
But if it's a known haunt,
if people have been there,
if people have talked about
it, written about it in books,
then again, you'd
have to disclose it.
Because people might come
lurking on your property
and things like that.
Because we want to see
something so badly.
I mean, I know the movie
"The Conjuring" came out
and I know the owners of the
house-- that have lived there
for 20 years, it's
not their story--
they bought the house after--
and they have people at 2:00
in the morning taking
pictures inside the house.
>>NOORY: We've had radio clients
that specialize in telling you
if somebody died in your house.
>>BELANGER: Right.
>>NOORY: You give them the
information where you are.
And they go off and
do their work and they
come back and say--
>>BELANGER: Right.
>>NOORY: --here so and
so died, or nobody died.
>>BELANGER: Yeah.
No, it's public record.
But imagine owning these
houses-- these poor folks
in Rhode Island-- they're
70 years old and at 2:00
in the morning someone's
taking pictures or knocking
on the door, can I come in
and look for your ghosts?
It is a sigma and
it can be a problem.
And, at the end of the day,
maybe if we can not only
respect the dead but
the living people.
>>NOORY: It's kind
of cool, isn't it?
>>BELANGER: It is cool.
It is cool because
the stuff captivates
so much that it gets turned into
Hollywood blockbuster movies,
gets turned into books, gets
turned into legends and lore.
And it is a global phenomenon.
Ghosts won't go away.
I have no doubt about that.
>>NOORY: They keep showing up.
>>BELANGER: They do.
They do.
>>NOORY: Why do some
ghosts hurt in a haunt?
>>BELANGER: It's rare.
Of all the stories
and interviews
I've done over the years,
I think that's rare.
Fear is not that rare.
Because if you hear someone
walking in your house,
even if they mean you no
harm, it's still an intruder.
You're going to be
afraid and uncomfortable.
But actually getting
physically harmed,
scratched, pushed,
maybe even possession,
getting into that
realm, that's when
I think we're starting to
deal with something that's
beyond the ghost experience.
>>NOORY: Right.
>>BELANGER: Now we're
talking about who people--
>>NOORY: We're in
a different arena.
>>BELANGER: I think we are.
I don't like to
use the word demon.
I think there are really
bad, horrible people-- living
people-- out there.
>>NOORY: Sure.
>>BELANGER: And I
can accept that there
would be really bad,
horrible spirits out there.
And if you're going to
tune into those energies
and let them
co-mingle with you, I
could see that influence
getting bad and dangerous.
And that's the point where
we need to take charge,
leave the environment if we
can-- if you have the means
to get out of wherever that
is-- but deal with it also
on every level.
On a spiritual level,
medical, and psychological.
>>NOORY: And do it all.
Technology is making
investigations even better.
We're going to show you some
in just a moment on "Beyond
Belief."
And welcome back
to "Beyond Belief."
Now we're going to talk about
technology, technology that
allows us to look at
ghostly apparitions.
Jeff Belanger back with us
and Bill Chappell as well.
Jeff, tell us a
little bit about Bill
and how you two got together.
>>BELANGER: Well, I've known
Bill for a number of years now.
He's a paranormal engineer
and developer of equipment.
I've worked with him on
Ghost Adventures and things
like that.
All the gear and gadgets you see
these guys use on television,
Bill's been making it.
And so-- but this
new camera that he's
brought with him
today is the most mind
blowing thing I've
seen come along yet.
>>NOORY: Bill, how did
you invent this stuff?
>>BILL CHAPPELL: Well, this is
kind of a culmination things.
Like I've told a lot of people,
it wasn't-- this wasn't an idea
for a paranormal camera.
I was also working
with a group of people
who were doing telekinesis.
>>NOORY: OK.
>>BILL CHAPPELL: And I was
working on a documentary.
And, George, like anything
else, I'm highly skeptical.
And I wanted to understand
what these people were doing.
And they only want to work
in a darkened environment
so there's only so many cameras
you can get around a thing.
>>NOORY: That's right.
>>CHAPPELL: So
this type of camera
is what's used-- is what's
called structured light.
And its lets us
see depth of field,
it lets us know so many
things we can't even
see with the own eye--
how far you are from me,
how long your arm is.
I mean, incredible
detail can come out
of one of these devices.
So I started with it this way.
I wanted to be able to see
where somebody's foot was,
where their arm was.
And the interesting
thing about the software
is it's designed to
find and detect people.
>>NOORY: In the dark.
>>CHAPPELL: In the dark.
So it's actually-- it's used--
people associate it with games.
The actual endgame for
this, if you go for it,
is the ultimate
consumer appliance.
And we'll see it as
technology goes on.
Everything will use this.
It'll be the gesture, the
remotes, TV remotes type
of control, keyboards,
they're history.
Five years now, 10 years
now, that technology
will be outdated.
So this technology
is designed to find
people in a given space.
And these cameras
have a depth of field
of about 16 to 20 feet and
about a 60 degree angle.
So in working with this,
I had this table set up
and I was working
with a group and I
noticed that-- I could see,
it did exactly what I thought.
I could see somebody
move their arm,
and because of the
position of their elbow--
like I put it behind here--
it would still pretty much,
the computer would
generate a skeletal field
based on this part of the torso.
>>NOORY: And you'd see the
real movement and all that.
>>CHAPPELL: Yeah.
It would let me know
where the hand went.
In other words,
a camera wouldn't
let me know what's
going on here,
but it could see the rest of it.
So it was really interesting.
I thought it worked great.
And then everybody left
the room for a break
and there was two chairs
and a little podium.
And I look up and the
camera is showing me
something standing
on top of the podium.
>>NOORY: Like a person.
>>CHAPPELL: A person.
Right.
And at first I kind
of thought, well, this
is some kind of weird thing.
And then I'm trying to
shine lights and figure out
what's going on.
>>NOORY: Thinking maybe
there's somebody there, right?
>>CHAPPELL: Somebody started
to walk into the room
and it disappeared.
And that's where it
started me thinking,
well, maybe this
is something else.
So the first thing
I started doing
was taking this off
the shelf device
and I started
manipulating what's
called the incidental angle.
I wanted to change
the depth of field
and I wanted to change
some of the ratios
and proportions it worked with.
And then we started
modifying the software.
The clip we're going to show
today is one where I rented out
and entire hotel, just
myself and a friend.
And we had it for four days.
So I try to eliminate anybody.
There was one person.
There was a caretaker that lived
in the basement of the hotel.
He was the only other
person in the hotel when
we were doing these experiments.
So it was kind of a thing
that was solidifying
something else was
going on for me.
Because, like I say,
I'm like everybody else.
I have a belief that it goes
on but I don't know what it is.
And I'm always trying to--
>>NOORY: Let's take a--
>>CHAPPELL: --find a better way.
>>NOORY: --look at what
you brought us here.
>>BELANGER: So this clip,
I mean, that's Bill.
>>CHAPPELL: Yeah.
I'm sitting in a chair.
>>BELANGER: Right.
So that's the software
doing exactly what
it's supposed to do.
Right?
That's-- it mapped Bill,
a regular living person.
And then this next part,
there was nothing in there
and suddenly--
>>CHAPPELL: You see how it
forms from the center out
as it drops in?
>>BELANGER: Right.
And now we're seeing a living
person next to the stick figure
in the chair, right?
You can see there's
nothing in the chair
and now there's a living
person and there actually
starts to be some interaction.
This is where it
gets mind blowing.
And so--
>>CHAPPELL: Now,
in this clip, this
is actually the caretaker
we're talking about.
And he's in here with
us for a few minutes.
And we're playing
with the lights
on and taking the lights off.
And now he's left the frame and
I'm walking in from the side
and I'm going to
walk up to the chair
and you'll see me
put my arm out.
Now, watch the
figure in the chair
because it's going to turn,
rotate and grab my arm.
>>BELANGER: To me, this is
some of the most compelling
footage--
>>NOORY: And it's small.
>>BELANGER: --I've seen.
Yes, it's like a child.
>>NOORY: That's unbelievable.
>>BELANGER: So
when you see that,
what's so incredible
to me, George,
is that the camera is doing
what it's supposed to do.
Find a human.
>>NOORY: Right.
>>BELANGER: It's not--
>>NOORY: It doesn't know if
its an apparition or not.
>>BELANGER: It just-- right.
>>NOORY: It's-- it's something.
>>BELANGER: It's doing
what it's supposed to do.
Yeah.
And that was the Cripple Creek
Hotel in the Cripple Creek,
Colorado, which is-- it's
not a really well known haunt
but it's getting there.
A former hospital from
the Sisters of Mercy
in the late 1800s.
And this was a
lawless mining town,
this is where miners went
who had accidents, victims
of shootouts, cholera, like
all the various diseases that
came through that community.
So it's a hospital,
is this building,
was a former hospital.
So it's got the history
and the back story.
And plenty of
eyewitness accounts.
And so you set this
thing up and all
it does is what
it's supposed to do.
Look for people.
And when you're
standing there, George,
and you see yourself
get mapped in
in the software,
and something's next to you and
sometimes you can even feel it,
it's kind of a cold area--
>>NOORY: Right.
>>BELANGER: --and it's really
validating what you're feeling,
what you're experiencing
at the time.
And I can't explain it.
And that's what I love,
that's what I live for.
>>NOORY: What this, to a
novice, me, is picking up
is energy waves.
>>BELANGER: Right.
>>CHAPPELL: To a sense, yeah.
>>NOORY: Whether
it's physical or not,
it's picking up energy
first and foremost.
>>BELANGER: Sure.
In the infrared part of
the spectrum, right, Bill?
>>CHAPPELL: Well,
the infrared-- it
could actually be
done either way.
The idea with
structured light is
that you're sending
out a known pattern.
The reason it's
done in infrared is
because it's undetectable
to you and I.
We don't see it so it doesn't
disturb the experience
or whatever we're doing.
The camera knows
what it should see.
In other words, if you can
imagine it's something as
simple as just X. It's much
more elaborate, but that idea.
So then it looks for distortions
within that field of view.
And by looking at that
distortion head on-- first,
it looks for pixel distortion.
Is it elongated,
does it stretch?
And then it has a secondary
camera that's off axis to it.
And by using just
a simple algorithm,
you can calculate the
distortion of the pixel
and where it is in reference
to the center of the screen.
And that's what gives
the unit the ability
to actually calculate
depth of field
and how far away something is.
The camera will
actually gradient things
so as you're walking through an
environment I can see the desk
and it'll actually change color
towards the end of the desk.
So I know how far
away something is.
If I pan through here, I
know you're closer to me
then George is.
Not-- and you might be a small
person, or a tall person,
but I can actually, physically,
tell the difference.
Much different than we
can with our human eye.
We don't discern depth
quite the same way.
>>NOORY: Are these
ghostly apparitions,
are the everywhere?
When you scan a camera
somewhere, are they everywhere?
Or in some cases,
nothing is there?
>>CHAPPELL: Well, a lot
of times-- and that's
the frustrating part.
There's certain places that
are just teeming with activity.
One time at the Saint Nicholas
it was just everywhere we
particularly went and set up.
We had this one room where
the nuns were supposed to be
and people had seen them
praying over the beds
and we actually have footage of
something standing on the bed
and then it actually lays down.
We have one clip where
Dave Schrader was with me,
and Dave is in the room and I
say, Dave, hold on a second.
And he stops and
you can actually
see this figure turned towards
him and take a step towards him
and walk out.
But at the same
point in time we'll
go to another location,
or a different time
at the same location,
and nothing will occur.
>>NOORY: Nothing.
If you were to take
this to Gettysburg,
I would guess you'd have
apparitions all over the place.
>>CHAPPELL: It's possible.
>>BELANGER: Depends
on the day, right?
>>CHAPPELL: It depends
on the day, absolutely.
>>BELANGER: Bill was
kind enough to let
me be a beta tester
for one of his devices
and I've taken it to
four different haunts
around New England
on investigations.
>>NOORY: Successfully?
>>BELANGER: Three
nothing happened.
But the fourth, it did.
>>NOORY: There it was.
>>BELANGER: To me
that's further vali--
if it happened every
time I would say,
Bill, what's happening?
Every time, really?
But three times I let it
run for hours and hours
in different sections.
Nothing, nothing, nothing.
And then this one-- it was
an old home, an old Victorian
mansion.
And I was standing there and
I saw myself get mapped in
and then this figure was
mapped in right next to me.
And the homeowners
looking and he said,
there used to be
a doorway there.
That used to be a room.
And he showed me,
after the event ended.
You can see in the plaster
and you went behind
and it's now became a
closet for another room.
There used to be doorway and
there was a figure standing
in what would have
been this doorway.
>>NOORY: Was it moving?
>>BELANGER: It moved a little,
just a couple arm movements.
It only lasted a few seconds.
My experience was
five or six seconds,
which is pretty long time.
You know, it's not.
>>NOORY: Do these figures
walk into the scene
or just appear and disappear?
>>CHAPPELL: You know,
I've only seen it one time
that we actually had something
walk into the screen.
It's usually when you see it
it's almost like it unfolds.
It starts from the
center and it breaks out.
If I would show
you shots of this
where we're mapping
people, the thing when
I let people play with this
I say, go around and find out
just how difficult it is
to let this camera find
somebody and project
a skeleton on it.
Is it's not a simple process.
But the person almost
shows up simultaneously.
Complete.
Every time we find something
that's I would assume
is not human, it's almost like
it unfolds in the environment.
It either drops
down from the top
or from the center and
it just folds out like--
>>NOORY: Truly amazing.
>>CHAPPELL: --it's forming it.
>>NOORY: You know, the
next evolution of this,
Bill and Jeff, is probably going
to be a communication device.
>>BELANGER: We're close.
>>NOORY: Because once you
realize they're there,
the next step is to realize
how can you communicate
with this being and you
might be onto something here.
>>BELANGER: I really
think we're getting close.
Proof is a very strong word--
>>NOORY: Edison
would have loved you.
Maybe you are the
reincarnated Edison.
>>CHAPPELL: You never know.
>>BELANGER: They
would have got along,
I can tell you that for sure.
>>CHAPPELL: Yeah, we
would have got along.
>>BELANGER: They definitely
>>NOORY: You do look alike.
>>BELANGER: A little
bit, little bit.
But I think we're
getting close, George.
I think stuff like
this, this camera that's
just doing what
it's supposed to do.
Like you said, communication.
I mean, I could just wave
yes for no or whatever.
You can establish that.
But what makes it start,
what makes it end,
it's going to take a
lot of further study.
But this is cutting edge.
>>NOORY: Have you tried to
talk to the entity knowing
that it was on camera?
>>BELANGER: Absolutely.
Once something starts to
happen, then we go into--
>>NOORY: Does it seem like
it's listening to you?
>>BELANGER: Well,
you can-- when it--
>>CHAPPELL: Sometimes--
sometimes yes and sometimes no.
And it's-- that's similar
to what we've experienced
in different types of things.
Sometimes it's almost impervious
to what's going around it.
In the clip you saw it
actually-- I put my hand down
to the chair, it rotates in
the chair and grabs my arm.
>>NOORY: Yeah, it kind
of grabbed your arm.
>>BELANGER: But when I see
something map on the camera,
that's my first question.
Can you raise your hand?
Just put your hand up.
Let me know you understand.
>>NOORY: Or come to me.
>>BELANGER: Yeah.
Let me know that
we're communicating.
>>NOORY: And does
anything like that--
>>BELANGER: Can you hear me?
>>NOORY: --happen?
>>BELANGER: I haven't
had it happen yet
but it's been fleeting so far.
But you have, right?
>>CHAPPELL: I had
when we were shooting
one of the episodes for
the-- can I say the?
>>NOORY: Yeah.
>>BELANGER: "Ghost Adventures."
>>CHAPPELL: For
"Ghost Adventurers."
And Billy Tolley and I-- Nick
had had a family emergency
and left when we were in Cripple
Creek in another location.
And Billy's downstairs
and he says,
let me know if
something's going on.
And I'm sitting--
and I've been sitting
in this room for like an
hour and nothing's going on.
I'm in the dark
and I'm just kind
of fidgeting back and forth
with four cameras sitting on me.
And then, all of sudden,
boom this thing pops in.
And it's a very small and it's
sitting up on a coffee table.
And the feet are waving around.
And I'm trying to get his
attention and he comes up.
And finally he gets up there
and I'm going, can you wave?
Can you wave at us?
Wave at Billy.
And you see it put it's
arm up and do this.
>>NOORY: So it listened?
>>CHAPPELL: I did.
We had the same--
>>NOORY: I love that.
>>CHAPPELL: The very
first time we actually
experimented in a
paranormal state
where we would intentionally
using the camera
for that use was actually
the the St. James hotel.
And, again, I had
the entire hotel.
And I had Chris
Fleming, a psychic.
And Chris is there
and Chris has no idea.
The new systems I take out,
I project it on the ceiling
so the user can see
the interaction.
But Chris had no
idea what's going on
and I wouldn't let anybody
say anything to him.
He's like, is there someone
there, can you give us a sign?
And this thing pops in right
next to Chris, right down
about his knee.
>>NOORY: Little again.
>>BELANGER: Little again.
>>NOORY: Small.
>>CHAPPELL: And
you could see it.
And it looks like it's
trying to pound on his knee.
And Chris is going,
can you give me a sign?
And this thing is
just hitting him.
>>NOORY: These are like little
leprechauns or something.
>>CHAPPELL: You know, I
don't know what that is,
George, when you look
at the type of things
we're doing if this is
a dimensional phenomena.
The size of it could
be simply nothing more
than a lensing or
a Doppler effect.
It's very difficult
to understand.
And it's so new and I'm
very cautious to jump out
there and go, hey, this is it.
Because, ultimately--
>>NOORY: Well, they may not be--
>>CHAPPELL: You pay
the price with that.
>>NOORY: --ghosts.
They may be entities
from another dimension
that this is picking up.
>>BELANGER: That's some of the
most interesting conversations
that we've had.
When we go to breakfast
and lunch and stuff
at these events and we start
talking about the why and the
how.
Is it a projection of
our own conscious mind?
Which is still amazing, right?
That's something.
>>NOORY: It is super.
Will, Bill, good luck with this.
And, Jeff, thanks for
bringing this along with us.
This is an incredible
device that I
think one day might
be a communication
device with the other side.
I'm George Noory.
Thanks for watching
Beyond Belief.